A Spiritual Guide to Mastering

the Challenges of

Women, Work, and Sexual Desire

Praise for David Deida

Davids Work speaks to the core of our work as men. He offers a bold view of men, and

challenges us to stand up and lay claim to the beauty and power of the masculine. He

does not advocate superiority as in “superiority to women” He speaks of superiority as

the Greeks might. The challenge is strictly internal. The invitation is to rise above our

mediocrity to let go of making excuses for our own laziness, to stop apologizing for

who we are and to stop blaming others or our childhood for how we've become. He asks

that we step into the fullness of our being-intense, focused, powerful, clear. And directly

connected to our hearts."

DENNIS MEAD-SHIKALY Executive Director: The Man Kind Project New Warrior Network

If your not in a cave with your head up your backside then chances are you'll be

challenged by women, work, and sexual desire. Deida tells it how it is on sex and

relationships from the most realistic place I've ever read. At last, a teacher who

understands sexual polarity and a man's core desires without compromising or

emasculating you with pseudo psychologicly, therapy, tantra, or political correctness.

You'll learn how to open your heart and intergrate the need to sleep with every attractive

woman you see, deal appropriately with a woman's emotional chaos, give your gift to the

world your lover, and finally transcend the whole lot by including it all. Deida writes in a

poetic style with clarity, humour, and now ness. Macho/newman are useless and inferior

archetypes. Just reading this book may make you a betterman, perhaps even a superior

one."

VIJAY RANA The Watkins Review

In TheWay of the Superior Man, author David Deida takes the reader on a powerful

journey into the heart of the contemporary masculine experience. With uncommon honesty

and unparalleled insight into the deepest desires of the masculine heart, Deida explores

the most challenging and important issues in men's lives. Covering every thing from work

and career, to dealing with sex, women, and love, to finding purpose in an increasingly

superficial and mechanical world, The Way of the Superior Man reveals how a man can

live a life of fulfillment without compromise by relaxing into the truth of his very being,

discovering his deepest vision, and giving his gifts without holding anything back. What

emerges is a wholly revolutionary look at what it means to be a man in today's world, as

well as an astonishingly practical guidebook to living a masculine life of integrity,

authenticity, and freedom. " THE MIDWEST BOOK REVIEW Reviewer's Choice

"This is a bold and challenging and very perceptive book. The cutting-edge masculinity of

these pages is sexually strong and spiritually clear ... Deida challenges and instructs men

to live on their edge, to go forth uncompromisingly in search of their own deepest truth

sand greatest purpose. He pulls no punches and brooks no weakness ... his insights

about male female interaction can't help but stimulate a more active understanding of this

complicated dynamic than a galaxy of Mars/Venus clones."

NAPRA REVIEW

To be a man in today's world, as well as an astonishingly practical guidebook to living a

masculine life of integrity, authenticity, and freedom ."

THE MIDWEST BOOK REVIEW Reviewer's Choice

"This is a bold and challenging and very perceptive book. The cutting-edge masculinity of these

pages is sexually strong and spiritually clear ... Deida challenges and instructs men to live on their

edge, to go forth uncompromisingly in search of their own deepest truths and greatest purpose. He

pulls no punches and brooks no weakness ... his insights about male/female interaction can't help

but stimulate a more active understanding of this complicated dynamic than a galaxy of

Mars/Venus clones.'

NAPRA REVIEW

The WAY of the

SUPERIOR MAN

A Spiritual Guide to Mastering the Challenges of Women, Work,

and Sexual Desire

David Deida

Important Caution

Although anyone may find the practices. disciplines, and understandings in this hook to be

useful, it is made available with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher are

engaged in presenting specific medical. psychological. emotional, sexual, or spiritual advice. Nor

is anything in this hook intended to be a diagnosis, prescription, recommendation, or cure to any

specific kind of medical. psychological, emotional, sexual, or spiritual problem. Each person has

unique needs and this book cannot take these individual differences into account_ Each person

should engage in a program of treatment, prevention, cure. or general health only in consultation

with a licensed, qualified physician, therapist. or other competent professional. Any person

suffering from venereal disease or any local illness of his her sexual organs or prostate gland

should consult a medical doctor and a qualified instructor of sexual yoga before practicing the

sexual methods described in this book.

Sounds True, Inc., Boulder, CO 803061997, 2004 David Deida

Sounds True is a trademark of Sounds True, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be

reproduced in any form or by any means. electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,

recording. or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from

the author and publisher.

Published 2004Printed in U.S.A.

ISBN 1-59179-257-6

Library of Congress Control Number: 20041 15454

With deepest gratitude, To the intimate partners and teachers Who

have drenched my life with their love and wisdom

Although anyone may find the practices, disciplines, and understandings in this book to be

useful, it is made available with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher are

engaged in presenting specific medical, psychological, emotional, sexual, or spiritual advice. Nor

is anything in this book intended to be a diagnosis, prescription, recommendation, or cure for any

specific kind of medical, psychological, emotional, sexual, or spiritual problem. Each person has

unique needs and this hook cannot take these individual differences into account. Each person

should engage in a program of treatment, prevention, cure, or general health only in consultation

with a licensed, qualified physician, therapist, or other competent professional. Any person

suffering from venereal disease or any local illness of his or her sexual organs or prostate gland

should consult a medical doctor and a qualified instructor of sexual yoga before practicing the

sexual methods described in this book.

Sounds True, Inc., Boulder, CO 803061997, 2004 David Deida

Sounds True is a trademark of Sounds True, Inc. All rights reserved. NO part of this book may be

reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,

recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from

the author and publisher.

Published 2004Printed in U.S.A.

ISBN 1-59179-257-6

Library of Congress Control Number: 20041 1 54 54

With deepest gratitude, To the intimate partners and teachers Who

have drenched my life with their love and wisdom

