Preface


My publisher asked me to write a preface to this new edition of The Way of the Superior

Man. Originaly I wrote this book as a practical guide for men and their

Intimate lovers. I wanted to share with readers the lessons I had learned in life

specifically, how a man can grow spiritually while passionately tussling with the

challenges of women, work, and sexual desire.

Now years later, after sharing this work with thousands of men and wemen, straight

and gay, single and coupled, I can confirm that the lessons presented in these chapters

really produce results. And in today's world of rapid sexual and spiritual evolution and

thus confusion-these it-sons may be more relevant than ever.

One of the more important lessons is this: as evolving human beings, we can learn that

mastery is an important phase to accomplish and pass through in this school of life

where we are learning to love more artfully.

Through the way described in this book, I have learned to love woman into light, earn

as much money as I want doing what I love to do and master the arts of sexual loving.

You can, too.

And then you will open to your next lessons, made possible by your real growth, just as

you have achieved and outgrown all of your interests up until now.

What you loved as a child is less interesting to you now as an adult.

And what occupies your attention now will cease to sooner or later. This gowth is both

natural and good. We are designed to outgrow every thing including our desire to

experience and improve the realms of money, sex, and intimacy.

The Way of the Superior Man shows you how a man and his lover can learn the lessons

necessary to grow to the next step-where the mind opens as feeling and the body is only

light. There is a way to grow through these lessons, too, I'm told, but first things first.

Live completely. Know your deepest purpose. Give the gift you were born to give. Enjoy

sex as a cosmic portal into loves wonders. Serve your friends so they may grow. And,

through the inevitable cycles of breath-taking success and gut wrenching despair, when

you have mastered and out grown the challenges of women, work, and sexual desire, be

willing to forget you were ever born.

Eventually-and I'm telling you in advance, just like I was told-the way of the superior

man renders obsolete everything that can be known or experienced.

For now, start with what concerns you. I did. What my teachers and life required that I

grow to understand-the path that worked for me as a man in a world of infinite

possibilities-is offered in the chapters of this book. You will lay down your own path as

you grow beyond your need to experience or know anything at all.

So, here's my summation for a new preface: Stop waiting. Feel every-thing. Love

achingly. Give impeccably. Let go.

Repeat with whatever remains, as long as you are moved to do so. This way dissolves

wide open.

Thisbookisaguideforaspecifickindofnewlyevolvingman.Thismanisunabashedlymasculine;heispurposeful,confident,

and directed, living his chosen way of life with deep integrity and humor-and be sensitive, spontaneous, and spiritual y alive, with a heart committed to discovering and living his deepest truth.

This kind of man is total y turned on by the feminine. He loves to take his woman sexual y, to ravish her, but not in some old-style macho fashion. Rather, he wants to ravish her with so much love she is vanished, they both vanish, in the ful ness of loving itself. He is dedicated to incarnating love on this earth, through his work and his sexuality, and he does so as a free man, bound neither by outer convention nor inner cowardice.

This newly evolving man is not a scared bul y, posturing like some King Kong in charge of the universe. Nor is he a new age wimp, al spine-less, smiley, and starry-eyed. He has embraced both his inner masculine and feminine, and he no longer holds onto either of them. He doesn’t need to be right al the time, nor does he need to be always safe, co-operative, and sharing, like an androgynous Mr. Nice Guy. He simply lives from his deepest core, fearlessly giving his gifts, feeling through the fleeting moment into the openness of existence, total y committed to magnifying love.

To help il uminate the purpose of The Way of the Superior Man, I will draw on a few principles of sexuality and spiritual growth which are developed in my book;

Intimate Communion.*

David Deida, 1995. Intimate Communion. Deerfield Beach, Florida: Health Communications, Inc.





