INTRODUCTION1


Until fairly recently, modern roles for men and women were fixed and separated. Men were supposed to go out and

earn money. Women were supposed to stay home and take care of the kids. Men often manipulated their women

through physical and financial dominance and threat Women often manipulated their men through emotional and

sexual strokes and stabs. The typical and extreme caricatures of this previous time are the macho jerk and the

submissive housewife. If you’re reading this book, you have probably outgrown this first stage of sexual identity. Or at least you can smile about it.

Next came (and is still coming) a stage in which men and women both sought to balance their inner masculine and

feminine energies toward "50/50," becoming more like one another. For instance, in the United States in the 1960s, men began to emphasize their inner feminine. They learned to go with the flow. They let go of their rigid, one-dimensional masculine stance and embraced long hair, colorful clothes, nature, music, and a more carefree and

sensual lifestyle, al means of embel ishing or magnifying radiance, energy, and the abundant force of life-magnifying

the feminine.

Meanwhile, many women were doing just the opposite. They were magnifying their inner masculine, which, at the level

of human character, appears as direction, or clarity of purpose, and vision. Women gained financial and political

independence. They strengthened their careers, focused more on personal long term goals, went to school in

increasing numbers for advanced degrees, and learned to be more assertive in their needs and desires.

Chances are: if you are reading this book, you are more balanced than your parents were. If you are a woman, you

are probably more in-dependent and assertive than your mother was. If you are a man, you’re probably more

emotional y expressive and open-minded than your father was. Or, at least such qualities seem acceptable to you,

even if you don't express them yourself. Remember, not that many years ago,

THE WAY OF THE SUPERIOR MAN

A man who got his hair styled or a woman who wore a business suit was often considered suspect.

It was a good thing, as time progressed, for men to embrace their feminine and women to embrace their inner

masculine. They became less fragmented and more whole in the process. They became less dependent on each other:

men could, indeed, change diapers, and women are completely capable of emptying the mouse traps. Macho men

became more loose and feeling. Submissive housewives became more Independent and directed. In terms of social

roles, men and women became more similar. This was an improvement for everyone.

But this 50/50 stage is only a second and intermediate stage of growth for men and women, not an endpoint. Side

effects of this trend toward sexual similarity can be seen as a major cause of today's unhappiness in intimacy. The

trend toward 50/50 has resulted in economical social equality, but also in sexual neutrality. Bank accounts are

balancing while passions are fizzling out. Men are less macho while sex and violence continue to increase on TV and

in the movies. Women are more in control of their economic destiny while they go in increasing numbers to therapists

and doctors to cope with stress related disease. Why is this happening?

In my workshops and consultations I hear independent and successful women complaining that many of today's men

have become “wimps” too weak and ambiguous to real y trust. Sensitive and affectionate men are complaining that

many of today's women have become "bal busters," too hardened and emotional y guarded to ful y embrace. Is this the ultimate expression of human sexual wisdom and evolution, or is there another step to take?

To answer these questions, we need to understand the nature of sexual passion and spiritual openness. Sexual

attraction is based on sexual polarity, which is the force of passion that arcs between masculine and feminine poles. Al natural forces flow between two poles. The North and South Poles of the Earth create a force of magnetism. The

positive and negative poles of your electrical outlet or car battery create an electrical flow. In the same way, masculine and feminine poles between people create the flow of sexual feeling. This is sexual polarity.

This force of attraction, which flows between the two different poles of masculine and feminine, is the dynamism that

often disappears in modern relationships. If you want real passion, you need a ravisher and a ravishee; otherwise, you

just have two buddies who decide to rub genitals in bed.

Each of us, man or woman, possesses both inner masculine and inner feminine qualities. Men can wear earrings,

tenderly hug each other, and dance ecstatically in the woods. Women can change the oil in the car, accumulate

political and financial power, and box in the ring. Men can take care of their children. Women can fight for their country.

We have proven these things. Just about anyone can animate either masculine or feminine energy in any particular

moment. (Although they still might have a strong preference to do one or the other, which we wil get to in a moment.)

The bottom line of today's newly emerging 50/50, or "second stage," relationship is this: If men and women are clinging to a politically correct sameness even in moments of intimacy, then sexual attraction disappears. I don't mean just the desire for intercourse, but the juice of the entire relationship begins to dry up. The love may still be strong, the

friendship may still be strong, but the sexual polarity fades, unless in moments of intimacy one partner is wil ing to play the masculine pole and one partner is wil ing to play the feminine. You have to animate the masculine and feminine

differences if you want to play in the field of sexual passion.

This is true in homosexual as wel as heterosexual relationships. Actual y, the gay and lesbian community is acutely

aware that sexual polarity is independent of gender. But you still need two poles for a

THE WAY OF THE SUPERIOR MAN

Passionate play of sexuality to persist in a relationship: masculine and feminine, top and bottom, butch and femme-

whatever you want to cal the reciprocal poles of sexual play.

It is up to you: You can have a loving friendship between two similar

But you need a more masculine and a more feminine partner in the moments when you want strong sexual polarity.

Doesn’t matter if both partners are men or both are women. It doesn't matter if, in a heterosexual relationship, the man plays the feminine pole and the woman plays the masculine pole. It doesn't matter if you change every day who plays

the masculine pole and who the feminine pole. For sexual polarity, you need an energetic polarity, an attractive

difference between masculine and feminine. You don't need this difference for love, but you do need it for ongoing

sexual passion.

For some people who have what I cal a more balanced sexual essence, sexual polarity doesn't real y matter. They

don't real y want much passion in intimacy. They don't want a loving tussle ful of sexual inspiration and innuendo. They would rather have a civilized friendship ful of love and human sharing without the passionate ups and downs. And

these people, this book wil be irrelevant, possibly even offensive.

This hook is written specifically for people who have a more masculine sexual essence, and their lovers, who wil have

a more feminine sexual essence since you always attract your sexual reciprocal. These people can't help but be

attracted into relationships based on difference, for better or for worse.

Your sexual essence is your sexual core. If you have a more masculine sexual essence, you would, of course, enjoy

staying home and playing with the kids, but deep down, you are driven by a sense of mission. You may not know your

mission, but unless you discover this deep purpose and live it ful y, your life wil feel empty at its core, even

Your intimate relationship and family life are ful of love.





INTRODUCTION


If you have a more feminine sexual essence, your professional life may be incredibly successful, but your core won't be fulfilled unless love is flowing ful y in your family or intimate life.

The "mission" or the search for freedom is the priority of the masculine; where as the search for love is the priority of the feminine. This is why people with masculine essences would rather watch a footbal game or boxing match on TV

than a love story. Sports are al about achieving freedom, such as by breaking free of your opponent's tackle or

barrage of punches, and about succeeding at your mission, by carrying the bal in to the end zone or remaining

standing after 10 rounds. For the masculine, mission, competition, and putting it al on the line (indeed, facing death), are al forms of ecstasy. Witness the masculine popularity of war stories, dangerous heroism, and sports playoffs.

But, for the feminine, the search for love touches the core. Whether on soap operas, in love stories, or talking with

friends about relationships, the desire for love is what appears in feminine forms of entertainment.

The feminine wants to be filled with love, and if the bliss of real love is not forthcoming, chocolate and ice cream-or a good romantic drama wil do. The masculine wants to feel the bliss of a life lived at the edge, and if he doesn't have the bal s to do it himself, he'l watch it on TV, in sporting events and cop shows.

Even happy and fulfil ed men and women find it enjoyable to watch sports and eat ice cream, of course. I am just trying to make a point: Even though al people have both masculine and feminine qualities that they could use in any

moment-to kick corporate ass or nurture children, for instance most men and women also have a more masculine or

feminine core. And this shows up in their regularly chosen entertainments, as much as in their preferred sexual play.

Think about it. Would you rather that your sexual partner was physical y stronger than you, or would you prefer to feel your lover's physical vulnerability? Which would turn you on more, to pin your partner on the bed below you or to be

pinned below your partner? To be swept off your feet by a sensitive and strong lover or to feel your lover surrender,

Swoon in your arms? You may want both at different times, but most often which turns you on more?

Or, does each of these alternatives turn you on just the same? That is are you just as turned on by a sexual partner

who is physical y weaker than you as by one who is stronger, or exactly the same strength?

Most people, about 90% in my experience, seem to have a definite preference. They definitely either prefer that their

partner kil s the cock roach crawling toward them, or they're fine with doing the crunchy job, themselves, perhaps with sporting fervor. Most people clearly favor watching a romantic love story on TV to a bloody boxing match, or vice versa.

They might be able to enjoy both at times, but their core becomes more emotional y involved in one or the other. If you have ever seen a group of masculine people watching a Super Bowl game, you know just how emotional the

masculine core becomes while beholding a good mission of people living at their edge and giving their gifts or getting

slaughtered for failing.

So, about 90% of people have either a more masculine or a more feminine sexual essence. Passionately, lovingly, and

fiercely, they would like to be ravished by, or to ravish, their intimate partner, at least some of the time, in addition to having a loving friendship. This holds true for homosexual and heterosexual people alike.

About 10% of people, men and women, heterosexual and homosexual: have a more balanced essence. Boxing

matches and love stories equal y make them emotional, or not. It doesn't real y matter to them whether their lover is

physical y stronger or more vulnerable than them. Sexual polarity just isn't that important to them in relationships

anywayRegardless of gender or sexual orientation, if you want to experience deep spiritual and sexual fulfillment, you

must know your natural sexual essence, masculine, feminine, or balanced and live true to it. You can't deny your true

sexual essence by covering it with layers of false energy for years, and then expect to know your authentic purpose

and be free in the flow of love. This book is a guide to shedding pretense and living true to your core, specifically for people who have a masculine sexual essence and their feminine essenced lovers who have to deal with them.

In a wel -intentioned effort to provide equal opportunity and rights for men and women, many people are inadvertently

squashing their true sexual essence. They don't have to; it's certainly possible to provide equality while also living true to your masculine or feminine core. But most people don't. So they suffer.

Most people are forgetting that the sameness that works in the office does not work in intimacy for about 90% of

couples: those couples composed of partners with masculine and feminine essences rather than balanced essences. If

sexual passion is to flow in these polarized intimacies, masculine and feminine differences should be magnified, not

diminished, in moments of intimacy. When these polarities are lessened due to family and work obligations, sexual

attraction is diminished, along with spiritual depth and physical health.

Stressing your masculine or feminine essence into a falsely balanced persona affects virtual y every part of you. Many

people with true feminine essences manifest a whole range of disturbed physiological symptoms as their feminine

energy "dries up" due to running excess masculine energy through their body, year after year, in order to fit into the masculine style of work. And many people with masculine essences, seeking to fit in with the feminine style of

cooperation and energy flow, disconnect from their sense of life purpose and inhibit their deep truth, afraid of the

consequences of being authentic to their own masculine core. Hence, the frequent complaints about too many

bal busters and wimps. Furthermore, when you deny your true core you deny the possibility of true and real love. Love

is openness, through and through. And true spirituality is the practice of love, the practice of openness. A person who denies their own essence and hides their true desires is divided and unable to relax into the ful openness of love. Their spirit becomes cramped and kinked. Unable to feel the natural ease and unconstrained power of their own core, they

feel threatened and frightened. This fear is the texture of their inability to open ful y in love. Such a person is spiritual y handicapped, obstructed at heart, even though they may have achieved a safe relationship and a successful career.

So, as a culture, we have advanced in terms of personal freedom, sexual equality, and social rights, but we have

remained spiritual y thwarted and afraid. For the sake of individual autonomy and social fairness, with only good

intentions in mind, we have erroneously begun to deny, smooth out, and neutralize our masculine and feminine

differences. In doing so, people often end up denying their deepest core desires, which are rooted in their true sexual essence. A lot of people today think they have a balanced sexual essence, but in most cases they are actual y

suppressing the natural desires which spring from their real masculine or feminine core.

It is important to admit what is real if you are going to real y deal with your life. The Way of the Superior Man focuses on many of these issues which we often sidestep or deny. For example, if you truly have a balanced sexual essence,

then you are just not that sexual y distracted by anyone. But if you are, for instance, a heterosexual man with a true

masculine sexual essence, then you wil be more or less constantly sexual y attracted to feminine women you see al

day, at the workplace and on the street, to married women as wel as teenage girls. As long as they shine the feminine

light, you wil feel the pul . How do you turn this potential sexual problem into a spiritual gift?

If you have a masculine sexual essence then you would probably admit, if you were being brutal y honest, that your

intimate relationship is just not as important to you as the "mission" in your life-but you still want a ful and energetic intimate relationship, perhaps quite badly. How do you deal with this often misunderstood dilemma?





INTRODUCTION


To answer questions such as these as clearly as possible, I have chosen to write this book as if speaking to the most

common case of a masculine sexual essence: a heterosexual man with a masculine sexual essence. As I've said,

there are many other possible arrangements of gender, essence, and sexual preference. You could, for instance, be a

heterosexual woman with a masculine essence married to a man with a feminine essence, or a homosexual man with

a masculine essence married to a man with a feminine essence, and the principles in this book would still apply to you.

And I trust the reader to make the appropriate adjustment in wording for his or her own unique case if it is different from this most common one.

I suppose the book could have been cal ed, "The Way of the Superior Person with a Masculine Essence," but the whole thing would become unwieldy if I tried to unfold every possible permutation of "he" and "she" and "masculine sexual essence" and "balanced sexual essence" and "feminine sexual essence" in every possible heterosexual, bisexual and homosexual relationship. In the end, I opted for simplicity. You can add the permutations yourself. If you or your partner has a masculine sexual essence regardless of anatomy, gender, or sexual preference-this book wil

help you clarify your life and enable you to give your deepest gifts, personal y and at work, sexual y and spiritual y.

The Way of the Superior Man is a book written explicitly for people who have already achieved respect for other

genders and sexual preferences, and who consider men and women to be social, economic, and political equals. Now,

we are ready to move to the next stage, grounded in this mutual respect and equality, but celebrating the sexual and

spiritual passions inherent in the masculine/feminine polarity.

It is time to evolve beyond the macho jerk ideal, al spine and no heart. It is also time to evolve beyond the sensitive and caring wimp ideal, al heart and no spine. Heart and spine must be united in a single man, and then gone beyond

in the ful est expression of love and consciousness possible, which requires a deep relaxation into the infinite

openness of this present moment. And this takes a new kind of guts. This is The Way of the Superior Man.

INTRODUCTION





